.TH INIT 8 "January 2025"

.SH NAME
init \- basic system initialisation

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B init
[016sS]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B init
is responsible for the initial startup and initialisation of the system. It also
stays alive for the whole life of the system to reap processes (to stop process
records accumulating in the kernel's process table). init also manages shutting
down and rebooting the system, but it does not reboot itself; this task is
delegated to the \fBrunlevel\fR(8) program. init manages a pipe (usually stored
at /run/pid1.pipe); one can send instructions along this pipe.

.PP
The other function that
.B init
can perform is sending instructions along the pipe to process 1. These
instructions govern shutting down the system. As mentioned, init does almost no
work by itself, so these just call the \fBrunlevel\fR(8) program. In reality,
you could just call this program from a superuser shell, but that is against the
rules; see more in the manpage for \fBrunlevel\fR(8). The meaning of the options
[016sS] are probably known to most UNIX administrators, but they are covered in
the
.B
OPTIONS
section.

.PP
On initial startup, \fBrunlevel\fR(8) is called with the option '3'. This
number is fairly arbitrary, but was chosen to fit with the System-V like
numbering of other runlevels. While
.B init
itself does not support the option '3', it is supported by the runlevel program;
thus, to return to normal operation from single-user mode, you can run the
command `runlevel 3' in the single-user shell. Upon shutting down, the runlevel
program is called with the appropriate
.I digit
(i.e. not one of 'S' or 's'). There is no way to halt the system without
powering it down safely; the only reason you would want to do this would be if
something really bad had gone wrong; in that case, you would probably want to
evade the init system anyway.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B 0
Shut down (halt and turn the power off) the system.

.TP
.B 1,s,S
Go to single-user mode. The details of this belong to \fBrunlevel\fR(8), but it
involves performing almost a complete shutdown, except for the reboot, and then
starting a superuser shell. This is not recommended except for the most drastic
maintenance of the system.
.BR
Note that unlike on some System V systems, all of 1, s, and S do exactly the
same things; they are synonyms for System V init compatibility.

.TP
.B 6
Reboot the system.

.SH AUTHORS
Solomon Wood
